CHECKING THE WRONG JOB FIRST CAN REMOVE A SAFE SCHEDULE
3 October 2026 UTC. Public development control, zero model calls.

Human-readable scenario
Two synthetic deliveries share one verifier and one deadline buffer. A is due
at tick2; B at tick4. Each check consumes two ticks of the serial verifier.
A has a harmless alternative, but inventory must be checked before using it.
B has no alternative. Need for each delivery is independently hidden. A protected
transfer requires delivered positive evidence. The buffer extends only one job's
deadline by three ticks. Eight total actions are available; each consumes one tick.

One feasible common policy
  Tick0: check A's alternative; inventory confirms availability at1.
  Tick1: use A's alternative; completion at2 rescues A if needed.
  Tick2: request verification for B; its report is due4.
  Tick3: reserve the buffer for B; at4 extend its deadline to7.
  Tick4: branch on B's delivered report. Transfer only if need is confirmed;
         otherwise stop. Transfer completes at5, within the extended deadline.
This same receipt-driven policy gives zero primary loss and zero authority breach
in all four worlds. It still incurs alternative/buffer operation costs and, in
the needed-B world, protected consumption. Harmless alternative use does not
require need verification under this contract; that assumption matters.

What initial verification of A changes
Requesting verify_a at tick0 returns acknowledgement at1 and report at2. A's
alternative now needs inventory completion at2 and use completion at3, too late.
At tick1, A's need is still hidden. Transferring A then would complete at2, but
would breach authority in the false-A world. To preserve both A possibilities
without that breach, the second action must reserve the only buffer for A,
completing at2 and extending A's deadline to5.

With the buffer consumed, the earliest B verification starts at tick2 and delivers
at4. A B transfer selected after its report completes at5, after B's deadline.
A transfer selected at3 can complete at4 as the report arrives, but the true-B
and false-B worlds are indistinguishable at selection. Such a shared action
breaches authority in the false-B world. Waiting for evidence instead loses
the needed-B world. No alternative or second buffer exists for B.

Thus no remaining observation policy can avoid BOTH primary loss and authority
breaches in ALL four support worlds after initial verify_a, within this contract.
This is an analytical timing argument over the available tools, not an exact
computed queue optimum or a claim that each realized world must fail.

Executed calibration
Twelve traces cover four worlds and three common policies. The feasible policy
passes the constraints in all four. A scripted verify-A recovery misses B in
both needed-B worlds, incurring five primary units. An always-transfer control
incurs two authority breaches in every world. Every trace matches the independent
queue verifier, and initial packets are identical across all worlds and policies.
The script's failure alone is not the all-policy proof; the preceding argument
provides the separate support for that claim.

What this adds
The feasibility diagnostic now has readable development witnesses on three
different dynamics: expiring verification, pending cancellation and shared verifier
scheduling. These demonstrate operation under specified contracts. They do not
establish independent structural generalization, theoretical novelty, deployment
frequency or a government/lab endorsement. Existing work covers shared-resource
races and harmful delay; cite it. Independent confirmation and priced collection
remain outstanding. No frozen sources or old scores were changed.

Reproduce
  python -m benchmark.necessity_queue_option_witness
Output: reviews/necessity-queue-option-witness.json, with all traces, outcome
vectors and normalized source hashes. The prior weighted optimum remains bounded
by its separately published interval; this diagnostic does not replace that result.
