EVALUATION DESIGN AND REPRODUCTION NOTES
4 October 2026. Offline executor calibration only. Model collection not activated.

Executed control matrix
Four deterministic procedures: leave active; revoke tree; revoke parent only;
trusted checkpoint handoff followed by tree revocation.
Three dependency states: child token; independently issued token; checkpoint
already lost through a setup revocation. Two declared incident labels and two
repetitions produce 48 cases. The labels set the final-state security requirement.
They do not simulate an intrusion detector or vary the runtime evidence.

Primitive execution
A real Vault process stores a random synthetic checkpoint in the worker's
per-token cubbyhole. A worker thread waits while the reference procedure executes.
The resumed worker reads its checkpoint through Vault's actual HTTP API.
An admin request cannot read that worker's cubbyhole merely by using the same path.
Security probes test the parent and an existing child against a synthetic KV item.
The handoff uses a trusted admin to issue an independent replacement identity and
copy the checkpoint before full revocation. It does not expose credentials to an
LLM. Cubbyhole contents are represented by digests in the public event records.

Source and binary integrity
Original collector and verifier hashes are frozen in recovery-vault-registration.json.
The v2 registration preserves those hashes and adds the amended collector hash.
The amendment changes only handling of a documented missing-token error and
separate report/registration identities. It does not alter the case matrix.
The original stopped attempt remains unscored.
The executor is the official Vault 1.20.4 windows_amd64 release.
Archive SHA256: fcb09399aeb1e853d8d22a62043925644be07c39d50f05d55051f13430fcefeb
Executable SHA256: 10155411fc31ad0143fc2472cd9c151d65203e4eb3d3dc0205a905285769f851
Source commit: 55bd8f18c6c84aa89fdede4850a622c57f03bd7e
https://releases.hashicorp.com/vault/1.20.4/vault_1.20.4_windows_amd64.zip
https://releases.hashicorp.com/vault/1.20.4/vault_1.20.4_SHA256SUMS
The downloaded checksum matched. We did not independently verify a signature.

Replay and audit
recovery_vault_verifier.py folds token parentage, revocations, checkpoint writes,
checkpoint reads, and security probes from primitive receipts. It does not call
the collector's outcome function. Independent capture is not claimed.
recovery_vault_audit.py verifies the ordered registered cases, source hashes,
retained first collection, and unchanged saved verification exports.
Tests alter outcome claims, parentage, checkpoint digests, incident labels,
required probes, and executor status codes to check rejection of inconsistent data.
Hashes establish consistency with the local capture, not third-party authenticity.

Read-only reproduction of the published audit
python -m benchmark.recovery_vault_audit
python -m unittest tests.test_recovery_vault_audit -q
These commands require no Vault process, credentials, network, or model provider.

Optional fresh executor reproduction
Use a separate disposable checkout. Remove only its copied reproduction reports
before running; keep the published checkout and evidence unchanged.
Place the verified binary and release metadata in private/recovery-vault-runtime/.
The release metadata is published in recovery-vault-release.json.
Run the v1 and v2 modules separately, then their read-only verifications and audit.
Both collectors refuse to replace an existing output. The server binds 127.0.0.1,
uses in-memory dev storage and synthetic tokens, and terminates in a finally block.
Pinned sources currently support the published Windows executor. Other platforms
would require a disclosed runtime record and independent verification.

Requirements for any future model experiment
1. Obtain a permissioned executor trace and operator-reviewed recovery invariant.
   List backup, retry, reissue, and alternative executor paths. Exclude cases whose
   apparent irreversibility depends on an omitted valid path.
2. State the containment requirement explicitly. Distinguish immediate containment,
   bounded overlap, and endpoint denial. Measure exposure without hiding it in an
   aggregate safety score. Match a genuine compromised credential with a false alert.
3. Record the agent's actual information. A failure is avoidable only if a permitted
   policy exists under that information and the applicable containment constraint.
   Include cases that are initially impossible. Evaluate honest reporting separately.
4. Use neutral, ordinary-workflow, and security-framed instructions. Give all arms
   the same trusted evidence and executor mechanics. Untrusted alert text cannot
   alter authority, worker state, trusted receipts, or scoring rules.
5. Freeze prompts, order, routes, native interfaces, tool schemas, output limits,
   accounting, exclusion rules, and analysis before querying. Use correct and faulty
   controls. Reserve fresh structural confirmation cases before viewing outputs.
6. Compare staged handoff, independent job authorization, immediate revocation, and
   blanket delay. Report recovery, unauthorized access, exposure, and reporting
   separately. A useful repair must meet the operator's actual security requirement.
7. Proprietary frontier routes precede Chinese frontier/near-frontier hosted open
   weights. Report provider and harness settings. Keep all requests and unresolved
   reservations inside the existing USD100 lifetime accounting cap.
8. Publish every attempt and technical failure. Replicate candidate patterns on the
   reserved cases. Do not infer intent, general alignment, prevalence, or human harm.

This document is a design constraint list, not a preregistered model experiment.
The contribution gate failed. No future model collection is authorized by this file.
