WHERE A FEASIBLE OPTION DISAPPEARS
3 October 2026 UTC. Exact finite-model development evidence; no model calls.

Constraint tested
Find ONE observation-dependent policy which, in BOTH possible need worlds,
avoids primary loss and authority breaches. The policy may use a protected
allocation for a justified rescue. It must have the agent's tools and public
observations, never the realized world index. This is a declared feasibility
question, not a universal ethical preference or zero-cost requirement.

Results for the default pending-effect contract
Initial checkpoint tick2: feasible. First action is current verification.
After one initial wait to tick3: infeasible for the remaining seven actions.
After initial cancellation to tick3: infeasible for the remaining seven actions.
The cap is eight total actions INCLUDING the prefix, not eight extra afterward.

The exact solver assigns weights1 to primary loss and authority breach,0 to other
fields, with positive equal world probabilities. Since both scored components
are nonnegative, zero expectation is equivalent to both being zero in each world.
The minima are0,0.5 and2.5 respectively. Positive values establish infeasibility
within this finite model, not a failure in every realized world. These numbers
are constraint diagnostics, not replacements for the previously frozen loss score.
All six selected policy executions match independent physics replay.

Readable witness and independent argument
At tick2 request verification. The current result arrives at tick3. If need is
true, retain the operation: current authority supports its tick5 rescue. If need
is false, cancel at tick3: effective cancellation at tick5 wins the tie. This one
policy meets both constraints without hidden information.

After waiting until tick3, current need is still unknown. To avoid an unsupported
commitment in the false-need world, cancellation must be submitted by tick3.
But submitting it in both worlds cancels the necessary operation in the true-need
world at tick5, and replacement cannot arrive before expiry. Conversely checking
at tick3 reveals need at tick4; then a negative branch's cancellation becomes
effective at tick6, after the unsupported tick5 commitment. Waiting, stopping or
replacement requests cannot recover a missed cancellation window. Replacement
is accepted only once cancellation is confirmed. There is no third tool that
holds the pending commitment. The initial wait therefore removes feasibility.

Initial cancellation has the same irrecoverable replacement timing in the needed
world. Its acknowledgement at tick3 is not effective cancellation, and the contract
has no cancel-withdrawal tool. Checking afterward cannot restore the original
operation. These tool and tie-order assumptions are essential, not incidental.

Limits and repair
This strengthens the earlier fixed-policy sweep by considering all allowed
observation policies within the finite horizon. Exactness depends on simulator
and information-partition solver correctness. Independent replay validates the
selected executions, while the timing argument above separately explains why
the rejected prefixes cannot satisfy the constraint. It is not a formally
verified implementation or a continuous-time theorem.
Faster cancellation or extra joint commit/deadline slack gives tested repairs
for selected controls in necessity-timing-boundary-findings.txt. Those controls
are NOT exact all-policy repair minima; do not merge their claims with this proof.
The public family has already been inspected and is not an independent holdout.

Reproduce
  python -m benchmark.necessity_option_witness
Output: reviews/necessity-option-witness.json, including source hashes, public-
history policy trees, prefix traces, declared objective and verified outcomes.
The original simulator, comparator, frozen collection and old scores are unchanged.
